Titles

Disclaimer: I don't have a title, so readers who do have one might feel that I'm diminishing their achievement. I don't intend to do so. In a system that rewards people with words, it's human nature to want to be rewarded. The word is a correlate-factor for success.

I've found that when there is disagreement there is often a dispute over terms that causes it. Titles in companies is one of those disagreements.

There are several pseudo-synonymous words in the broad conceptual domain that we're dealing with, and their messy Venn diagram is what we need to sort out. If this was a software project, this job would fall to the architect. Perhaps we can apply the same clarity of thought to the the problem and straighten out the conceptual fuzz that is holding us back?

Rank, Role, Title, Task, Job, Profession, Calling, Occupation, Position...

At BVN we often use all of these interchangeably but let me pin them down a little so that we can discuss things usefully.

Title is usually a word that we use to describe the label we put on someone, i.e. Associate, Senior Associate, Practice Director, Senior Practice Director, Principal. That list or hierarchy could easily be called rank too. In fact, that might be more helpful as we also have admin assistants, IT support managers and practice directors of IT. Maybe those would be roles?

The confusion is endless. Maybe if I come to the problem from a different angle. Why do we feel the need to have a phrase that describes us anyway?

The official good:

If (and that's a big if!) we all agree on what the words mean, it can be a very efficient way of explaining to other people what a person's purpose in the world is. That works internally (That's James, he's the National Director -- whatever that means, it seems to have the right effect). It also works externally, to reassure people that we meet that they haven't been sent a lowly, minion chump to deal with.

The unofficial good: 

People are motivated by strange things. We are indoctrinated by the school system that we should strive for advancement. We aren't really taught what advancement really looks like. So when something comes along that looks like an advancement we jump at it. Like Pavlov's dogs, we strive for the next gold star on the McDonalds badge--or the next title-word--without stopping to think too hard about what it actually means. It's a recognition-reward mechanism.

This means that a smart organisation can motivate people to work harder, purely with words. (http://qz.com/384376/how-companies-motivate-employees-when-there-are-no-promotions-to-hand-out/)

The bad:

Titles create a sense of difference between people, where really none exists. The hushed tones that people refer to "the principals" have always struck me as extremely creepy. 

I don't think that, in their current form, titles at BVN really do anyone any good. They are bestowed upon people without the title really meaning anything.

It would be much more effective to have role descriptions that are descriptive and change when the activities undertaken by that person change. 

This would undoubtedly cause power struggles and skirmishes as pecking orders are established - human nature will have its way. But we should resist the urge to add "senior" to role descriptions to pander to people's fragile egos.

Titles, in whatever form they occur, are presumably intended to be descriptive. To categorise people into groups. I have written before (http://tropos.bvn.com.au/2015/08/17/fluid-categories/) about my thoughts on how categorisation should work, but I'll reiterate it here. Categories should form around whatever attributes we find it useful to use to form the definition. or "Categories are an emergent way of describing set creation operations based on attributes". What that means is that things, in this case the things are people, shouldn't have titles. Titles can still exist in the abstract, but they get associated with the person by virtue of the attributes that a person has.

https://youtu.be/05WS0WN7zMQ

All of what I've written above assumes that we maintain the status quo and only change the title regime. As always, I'd rather go further...

